meantime in the United States President
Joe Biden has criticized Israel for the
way that it is conducting its military
campaign in Gaza his remarks followed a
warning from us officials over Israeli
plans to move the ground defensive into
the southern city of Rafa Israel's prime
minister says that it is a stronghold
for Hamas which carried out the October
7th Terror
attacks another fam left grieving
after five relatives were killed by
Israeli air
strikes Lana alash shuk lost both her
parents we were sleeping and we suddenly
woke up to the sound of bombing rocks
were above our heads and a fire had
started at the end I was calling for my
mother father and my siblings and they
didn't answer me
the southern city of Rafa is home to
over a million displaced people who fled
to the Border Town seeking
safety people say they are living in
fear of a promised isra
Advance we don't know where to go they
told us that Rafa is a safe area for
displaced people and we were displaced
to Rafa after being told to leave Han
unes so the situation SC
do we have to go home are destroyed
houses we have no other choices we are
just waiting to die we are waiting for
the moment of our
execution US National Security Council
spokesperson John K said a military
operation in Rafa would be a
disaster and that the US would not
support
it President Joe Biden also gave his
strongest warning yet
I'm of the view as you know
that the
conduct of the
response in Gaza in the Gaza Strip has
been
um over the top I talked to BB to open
the gate on the Israeli side I've been
pushing really hard really hard to get
humanitarian assistance into Gaza there
are a lot of innocent people who
starving a lot of innocent people who
are in trouble and dying and it's got to
stop streets close to Ru as Q8 Hospital
have been left in
Ruins and after Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu told troops to
prepare for operations in the
city the few safe areas left in Gaza are
now also under
threat and let's get some context now
with Frank Lich he is a senior lecturer
in strategic studies at Portsmouth
University and a former British Military
Intelligence officer he joins us from
Oxford uh Frank welcome to back to the
program we've heard criticism coming
from the US regarding reports that
Israel plans to expand its offensive to
Rafa an operation has not started do we
have a sense of what might be being
considered here is it likely to be a
widescale assault or something
different well good morning Sarah I
think it's important to realize that the
Israeli Army that went into Gaza 4
months ago is not the Israeli army or
Defense Forces that we see today they've
learned a very great deal so no longer
do we see the frankly indiscriminate or
apparently indiscriminate air strikes on
a large scale instead what we see is a
focus on ground operations and indeed
there's good evidence now of
subterranean operations so that's the
first thing the second thing is look
whether the Americans like it or not and
there has by the way been quite a lot of
the tail wagging the dog with respect to
the us and this operation in RIT large
but uh look the Israeli is going to do
this anyway they have to uh proceed and
clear as they see it the entire area
they will be entering Rafa as uh their
prime minister has said uh we can only
hope that the targeting procedures and
the Rules of Engagement that the
Israelis
are as we speak developing for Rafa will
uh will reduce necessary civilian
casualties this is going to happen
whatever the Americans say meantime
Israeli officials are saying that Hamas
militants have begun reappearing in the
northern Gaza Strip um what does this
say about Israel's ability to achieve
its War goal of wiping out the group
also in central parts around conun for
example where fighting
continues yes very interestingly
recently there reports that the uh that
us intelligence officials take the view
that uh the Israelis AR nowhere near
achieving their objectives of
eliminating Hamas and this uh this uh
these actions in Gaza City are evidence
of that they're quite interesting Sarah
as to how they're happening what the
Israelis think is that a lot of
terrorists are terrorists that are
engaging them there are in fact entering
or re-entering the city through tunnels
that they haven't yet found which brings
back this key element which still comes
back and back and back and the Israelis
have not yet conquered it this of the
tunnels so that's the first thing the
second thing on a more strategic level
is the Israelis must be thinking now
look we are getting back to the old ways
of what they call mowing the grass in
other words we simply can't eliminate
the problem it will continue to grow and
we're going to have to deal with it as
time goes on this war is nowhere near
finished and they're going to have to be
conducting these actions for many months
yet I'd like to get you to respond also
to these reports uh saying that the
Israeli Army is trying to create a
so-called buffer zone by destroying
buildings in Gaza the UN Human human
rights uh Chief says that that would
potentially violate International laws
of war how do you see such operations
from a military perspective
strategically
speaking well what the Israelis
obviously are trying to create there is
a cordon sanitar around the the main
core of the of the strip I think it's
two kilometers they want uh which would
be that from their perspective a
security Zone would be I would expect
mined and patrolled by Israelis so there
is a mil military role then and the
question is of course in international
law uh is that an adequate reason for
breaching the uh very clear rule against
such things in international
humanitarian law that's a tradeoff the
israeli's judgment will be of course it
is it's a we're justified by the
military necessity that we consider is
imposed upon us I think most people
would say that they could impose such a
Zone Cordon outside the borders of Gaza
should they wish to do so but of course
that would deny them uh land uh on their
side so this is a political question
there is a military requirement for it
the question is on which side of the
Border should it be uh imposed Frank
ledv senior lecturer in strategic
studies at Portsmith University many
thanks thank you
sir